Japan was a devastated country at the time of its surrender in August 1945. More than 2.5 million Japanese, including more than 500,000 civilians, had perished since Pearl Harbor. Major parts of Tokyo and many other cities had been burnt to ashes. One third of the nation’s wealth had been destroyed. Internationally, Japan was a defeated country waiting for occupation by the Allied Powers. General Douglas MacArthur, Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers, landed at Atsugi airbase in late August to begin the occupation. Japan formally surrendered to the Allied Powers on the US battleship, USS Missouri, on September 2. Since it was the United States that had defeated Japan, the occupation of Japan by the Allied Powers meant in fact the occupation of a single country, the United States. President Harry Truman rejected the Soviet Union’s offer to occupy part of Hokkaido. According to America’s initial Post-Surrender Policy for Japan, the ultimate objective of the occupation was, “to ensure that Japan will not again become a menace to the United States or to the peace and security of the world.” The Japanese military was completely disarmed but the Japanese government was not disbanded. The United States decided to rule Japan through the existing Japanese Government As in the prewar period, prime ministers were appointed by the Emperor and organized their cabinets. The cabinet would submit draft legislations to the National Diet, which would in turn make them laws for the implementation of the post war reforms. The entire process of the parliamentary system was conducted under the strong directives of General Headquarters (GHQ). The GHQ ordered a series of sweeping reforms of the Japanese government. Those reforms included dismantling of the zaibatsu (business conglomerates that dominated the prewar Japanese economy), agricultural reforms to distribute land to tenant farmers, and labor reforms. Democratization of politics was also an early and important item on the agenda of the occupation. General MacArthur ordered the Japanese government to draft a new democratic constitution. As the draft prepared by the (Japanese parliamentary) committee struck him as overly conservative, MacArthur ordered his staff to make its own draft reflecting his ideas, including an article that appeared to deny Japan even the right of selfdefense. GHQ ordered the National Diet to use the GHQ draft as the basis for the writing of the new constitution. To transform the National Diet into a more democratic one, GHQ ordered the Japanese government to dissolve the Diet and call the first general election in the spring of 1946. Universal male suffrage was enacted in 1925 in Japan. At that time GHQ ordered the realization of complete universal suffrage by giving women the vote. Thirty-nine women were elected to the Diet in the election conducted in April 1946. Subsequently, the Diet democratically reformulated, deliberated the draft constitution, made a limited number of revisions, and passed it in October 1946, to take effect in May 1947. The Emperor at that point became “the symbol of the State and the unity of the people who shall not have powers related to government.” The constitution included, in accordance with the intentions of MacArthur, Article 9, which states: “Aspiring sincerely to an international peace based on justice and order, the Japanese people forever renounce war as a sovereign right of the nation and the threat or use of force as means of settling international disputes. In order to accomplish the aim of the preceding paragraph, land, sea, and air forces, as well as other war potential, will never be maintained. The right of belligerency of the state will not be recognized.” Except for a few constitutional lawyers, the overwhelming majority of Japanese thought that the article prohibited Japan from possessing any kind of armaments. Subsequently, however, as Japan was pressured by the United States to establish its own Self Defense Forces, the Japanese government made a series of interpretations of Article 9 that legally justified Japan’s possession of limited defense capabilities. In many ways, the interpretation of this article was to become the central issue of Japan’s security policy to this day. Section 2: Return to the International Community While Japan was pursuing various reforms imposed by the US occupation forces, world politics was never static. Former British Prime Minister Winston Churchill pointed out as early as February 1946 that the “iron curtain” had descended across Europe. What was eventually to be called the “Cold War” became the dominant feature of international relations. The United States began to realize the danger of the Soviet Union, and made adjustments to its Japanese occupation policy. In January 1948 US Secretary of the Army Kenneth Royall argued that the U.S. wanted Japan to become “a self-sufficient democracy, strong enough and stable enough to support itself and at the same time to serve as a deterrent against any other totalitarian war threats which might hereafter arise in the Far East” end of quote. East Asia then saw a series of significant developments. As the efforts of the United Nations to realize a unified Korea failed, the Republic of Korea and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea were established in 1948. In China, the Communist Party defeated the Nationalist Party and established the People’s Republic of China in October 1949. Chairman Mao Zedong, who was strongly committed to the policy of “leaning to one side,” went to Moscow that winter and concluded the Treaty of Friendship, Alliance and Mutual Assistance with the Soviet Union, which regarded Japan as a potential aggressor. Then in June 1950, North Korea, under Kim Il Sung, launched a military attack on the South, starting the Korean War. In East Asia, the Cold War became hot. In that tense international situation Japan was given an opportunity to return to the international community as an independent country. The United States hosted a peace conference in San Francisco in September 1951. The Soviet Union dispatched its delegation to the conference but did not agree to the draft peace treaty. Neither the People’s Republic of China or the Republic of China was invited. Although some political parties in Japan suggested waiting until all parties agreed to the treaty, the government under Prime Minister Yoshida Shigeru decided to accept the treaty with the United States and other major allied powers. In his acceptance speech Yoshida said: “The peace treaty before the Conference contains no punitive or retaliatory clauses; nor does it impose upon Japan any permanent restrictions or disabilities. It will restore the Japanese people to full sovereignty, equality, and freedom, and reinstate us as a free and equal member in the community of nations. It is not a treaty of vengeance, but an instrument of reconciliation. The Japanese Delegation gladly accepts this fair and generous treaty.” Many parties, including the United States and the United Kingdom, waived reparation claims. They shared the recognition that the harsh reparation imposed on Germany after the First World War brought about huge grievances there that gave birth to the rise of the Nazis, and that a generous peace would be preferable, especially given the Cold War circumstances. Now that Japan was to become independent, it had to devise its security policy to protect itself. Prime Minister Yoshida, believing that devastated Japan could not afford to maintain a costly military, decided that Japan had no other option than to rely on the United States, which is democratic in the Cold War environment. He concluded a security treaty with the United States on the same day as the signing the San Francisco Peace Treaty, which allowed the United States to maintain a significant military presence in Japan. The United States, however, insisted that Japan also develop its defense forces, though it was the U.S. who originally imposed Article 9 on Japan. Prime Minister Yoshida, rather reluctantly, committed to making a limited defense buildup. The San Francisco Treaty allowed the United States to continue its occupation of Okinawa and other islands, a disappointment that Japan had to endure as a cost of its security dependence on the United States. Among leading Japanese politicians, some argued for the revision of the Constitution to realize full-fledged rearmament, but the series of general elections that took place after the end of occupation did not support the political forces in favor of the Constitutional revision. Prime Minister Hatoyama Ichiro, though himself an advocate of constitutional amendment, decided to endorse a new interpretation of the Constitution for the purpose of the Self Defense Forces. The government argued that despite Article 9, Japan as a sovereign state had an inherent right of self-defense and that the minimum forces necessary for such selfpreservation were constitutional. The Self Defense Forces were established in 1954. Another demand to Japan by the United States was the establishment of diplomatic relations between Japan and the Republic of China. John Foster Dulles, US negotiator for the peace treaty with Japan, made that demand to Yoshida, saying that unless Japan chose Taiwan, the US Congress might not give consent to the ratification of the San Francisco Treaty. Japan negotiated with Taipei for diplomatic relations. Peace was agreed on the same day that the San Francisco Treaty was enacted. The Republic of China also waived reparations by Japan. Another important country with which Japan needed normal diplomatic relations was the Soviet Union. Because the Soviet Union opposed Japan’s participation in the United Nations, normalization of relations with Moscow became an important diplomatic objective. However, the four islands off Hokkaido, which the Soviet Union occupied in late August 1945, became the major issue of contention. The Hatoyama cabinet, having no prospect of resolving this territorial issue at that time, decided to normalize diplomatic relations with Moscow, leaving the resolution of the territorial issues to future negotiations. The Soviet Union wanting relaxation of tensions globally at that time agreed. With the normalization of relations with Moscow, Japan was finally accepted as a member of the United Nations in 1956. The first official Japanese economic white paper, published in 1956, declared that the “postwar era” was over. Devastated Japan now finally successfully recovered by 1955. As can be seen in this graph, Japan’s per capita GDP, which had fallen to half the pre-war level, returned to the pre-war level by 1955. The white paper argued that “the growth through recovery is over. The growth from now should be supported by modernization.”  Under the new Constitution, the prime minister is designated by the Diet from among the Diet members. If the two houses disagree, the House of Representatives, the lower house prevails. Therefore, the results of the lower house elections are critical for the formation of the government. Many political parties emerged in the early days of post-war Japan, but broadly speaking, there were anti-communist, capitalist-oriented parties, social democratic parties, some of which were sympathetic to communism, and the communist party. The Katayama and Ashida cabinets during the occupation period were coalition governments including socialist parties, while the Yoshida cabinet was supported by capitalist conservative parties. After the radicalization of the communist party in 1950, the Socialists were split between Rightists and Leftists; the Rightists were anti-communist and the Leftists were still sympathetic to the Soviet Union. On the other hand, the capitalist oriented conservative parties went through a series of complex re-groupings. Finally, in 1955, as the Rightist and Leftist Socialist Parties decided to reunite to form the single Socialist Party, the Liberal Party and the Japan Democratic Party decided to join together to form the Liberal Democratic Party. Until the beginning of the 1990s, Japanese politics was characterized by the confrontation between these two groups, the LDP and the JSP. However, this was not exactly a symmetric two-party system; the JSP was much weaker. The government was dominated constantly by the LDP. Many political scientists call this pattern the 1955 System; some others call it the LDP-dominant system. The first crisis of the 1955 System was brought about by the revision of the Japan-U.S Security Treaty. The revision of the treaty itself largely involved clarification of the obligations of both parties; it was ratified by the Diet in January 1960, but it triggered major political turmoil. The opposition suspected that Prime Minister Kishi wanted to introduce conservative authoritarian rule. A large number of demonstrators surrounded the Diet Building until the treaty was enacted in June 1960. Prime Minister Kishi took responsibility for the political confusion and resigned. The LDP governments in the 1960s, realizing the risks of ideological politics, made all-out efforts for economic growth and expansion of social welfare by adopting many of the policy measures that the opposition had proposed. Prime Minister Ikeda Hayato, assuming power immediately after the Security Treaty crisis, shifted the public’s attention to his policy of “income-doubling.” In 1961 all Japanese came under “universal health coverage” in which all citizens were covered by some type of health insurance system. Japan joined the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) in 1964. Tokyo successfully hosted the 18th Olympics in the same year. Economic growth during the 1960s was anything but remarkable. Japan’s GDP grew at a double-digit rate throughout the 1960s, and surpassed that of West Germany in 1968, making Japan the second largest 7 economy in the free world. As the LDP government distributed those economic gains throughout the nation, many Japanese came to consider themselves members of the middle class. In 1964, 87% of Japanese reported that they belonged to the middle class. That extremely high growth brought about undesirable changes too. Because the growth was realized by the expansion of heavy and chemical industries, air and water pollution became serious in many urban centers. As a result of deficient regulations, poisonous water contamination caused many tragic deaths and widespread illness, as in the case of Minamata. Roads were perpetually congested and traffic accidents became one of the major sources of death. In 1970, 16,765 people were killed in traffic accidents (16.33 deaths per 100,000.)